1) Shift cipher

Theory

The shift cipher is a cryptographic substitution cipher where each letter in the plaintext is replaced by a letter a certain number of positions further down the alphabet. This number of positions is sometimes called a key.

The Caesar code is the most well-known shift cipher, usually presented with a shift key of value 3


Encryption


The shift cipher encryption uses an alphabet and a key (made up of one or more values) that shifts the position of its letters. A letter in position N in the alphabet, can be shifted by X into the letter located at position N+X (This is equivalent to using a substitution with a shifted alphabet).

Example: Take the letter E in position 5 in the alphabet ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ, it will be encrypted by a shift of 3 in position 8 or H.

If the shifted position exceeds the number of letters in the alphabet, then take it at the beginning (imagine the alphabet as cyclical).

Traditional shift encryption only applies to the 26 letters of the alphabet. For numbers or special characters, it is possible to change the alphabet or leave them unchanged.


Decryption


Decryption requires knowing the shift used and the alphabet. Take a letter in position N in the alphabet that has been encrypted by a shift of X, it must be shifted by -X to return to its original position N-X.

Example: The letter H in position 8 in the alphabet ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ, will be decrypted from a shift of 3 in position 8-3=5 or E.
An alphabetic substitution is a substitution cipher where the letters of the alphabet are replaced by others according to a 1-1 correspondence (a plain letter always corresponds to the same cipher letter).

The substitution is said to be monoalphabetic because it uses only one alphabet, this alphabet is said to be disordered.


Encryption The monoalphabetical substitution consists in using a mixed alphabet (with the letters in an unusual order) and replacing the letters of the alphabet normal by it.


Example: NBAJYFOWLZMPXIKUVCDEGRQSTH is a totally random alphabet with the 26 letters of the Latin alphabet.


To understand, write the alphabet over the classic alphabet:

Plain alphabet ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ

Substitution alphabet NBAJYFOWLZMPXIKUVCDEGRQSTH


The substitution involves a replacement in the plaintext of all the letters of the first row with the letters associated with the second row.

Example: All A become N, all the B remain B, all the C become A, etc.


Example: With this substitution DCODE is encrypted as JAKJY.

Screenshot of the output
